{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red251\green0\blue7;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww27040\viewh13940\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720

\f0\fs36 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
If you you look at the attached figure, if the lattice plane intersects with x and y axis in real space at x=a and y=b, respectively. And as we talked about it, the periodicity along the x-direction and y-direction will lead to frequency component located at 
\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
x*=1/a, 2/a, 3/a
\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, ... and 
\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
y*=1/b, 2/b, 3/b
\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, ... And then we just DEFINE (1/a,1/b) as our Miller index corresponding to the lattice plane shown in the figure (2D lattice). Thinking of the discrete value of frequency component in x and y direction as given above (in bold red), we can easily see that the Miller index is nothing but the composition of unit frequency component in x and y direction.\
\
Furthermore, if defining the frequency space using the common notation - the reciprocal space, the Miller index is nothing but the unit vector, i.e. (x*,y*)=(1/a,1/b). Even further, the 'distance' from point (x*,y*) to the origin in reciprocal space is given by: d*=sqrt(1/a^2 + 1/b^2). And as before, this 'distance' in reciprocal space (in another word, just the frequency component) should definitely correspond to some lattice plane spacing (i.e. the period) in real space. The spacing is simply is:\
\
1/d*=1/[sqrt(1/a^2 + 1/b^2)]\
\
Rearranging a bit, we will get:\
\
1/d*=ab/sqrt(a^2+b^2)\
\
\'a0What is this spacing? What does it correspond to in real space. If looking at the lattice in the figure from the direction perpendicular to the lattice planes, we should be able to find that 1/d* is just equal to the perpendicular spacing between the lattice planes, as shown in the figure. I label out all the geometrical elements needed to calculate the perpendicular spacing between the lattice planes.\
\
So finally in summary, the lattice planes in the figure correspond to many frequency components in the reciprocal space. But the thing is it is quite tedious to list all the components one by one. Actually, it turns out that we only need to define some unit components (like in this case, 1/a & 1/b), which can expand the whole frequency space, i.e. expressing all frequency components (like the one perpendicular to the lattice planes can be represented by the vector (1/a,1/b) in reciprocal space) using the defined unit ones. And the Miller index is just the composition of all such unit frequency components.}