Within the weak periodic potential approximation, the band gap is just the 
direct result of the periodic potential. Using the perturbation theory, when
the k value is located within the BZ, we have the corresponding correction for
both the eigen states (wavefunctions) and the corresponding eigen value. As for
the k point located at the BZ boundary, this corresponds to the situation where
the eigen state is degenerate. From the perspective of mathematics, this 
basically means the denominator of the correction terms for the wavefunction 
becomes zero. In such situation, the method specially for dealing with the
degenerate eigen state should be used, which then introduces the so-called 
secular equation, leading to the solution for the eigen values at the BZ 
boundary.

Similarly and generally for any methods dealing with the band structure of 
certain system, the energy eigen value varies as the function of k within the 
BZ, which basically expands the originally discrete energy levels to energy
band. For example, within the framework of tight binding model, the energy 
eigen value can be written as the function of k, which is composed of three 
terms - the initial discrete energy level, an integration term accounting for
the contribution from the local atom and another integration term accounting
for the contribution from all the nearest neighbour atoms. The result is that 
the energy varies as the function of k, around the initial discrete energy 
level. Furthermore, the variation of energy (as the function of k) is within
certain range, which is determined by the property of the k-dependent function
form. Then it is natural to understand the existence of band gap, since the two
adjacent energy bands, where the energy eigen value for each band varies around
the corresponding individual energy level, may not intersect in the energy 
space, as shown in the following diagram:

------------------------------
------------------------------
------------------------------
******************************	->	The initial energy level-2
------------------------------
------------------------------
------------------------------

				->	The gap

------------------------------
------------------------------
******************************	->	The initial energy level-1
------------------------------
------------------------------

The same logic can transfer to DFT-based (or any other quantum electronic 
structure computation methods) band structure calculation, since anyways it is 
just the method to obtain the Hamiltonian of the system that differs among 
various approaches including DFT, Hartree-Fock, etc. And the theoretical 
foundation for the band structure is universal - the Bloch theorem. Specifically 
for DFT calculation, the separation between different energy levels should be 
promised by the orthogonality of the wavefunctions corresponding to different 
energy band, which is required when calculating the band structure in k-space. 
Again, the variation of certain energy band (i.e. the 1st, 2nd, etc. band) is
finite within the 1st BZ, which promises the existence of band gap at the BZ 
boundary.

Final remarks:
Once the charge density and the corresponding potential is obtained in the DFT 
calculation, the corresponding Hamiltonian is available. Then comes the 
questionis: isn't it straitforward to write the obtained Hamiltonian in matrix
form with certain basis set and diagonalize the matrix to obtain the eigen 
states and the corresponding energy eigen value? Why should we bother with 
stepping the wavefunction coefficients (with the given basis set) as described 
in the CASTEP tutorial about the calculation of band structure in CASTEP (see
the link at the bottom of current document for the source of the corresponding
material)? The answer is that the obtained Hamiltonian from DFT calculation
usually cannot be diagonalized, therefore we have to step the wavefunction 
coefficients (with the given basis set) to obtain the lowest energy value 
corresponding to the given k point - the ground state. BTW, in the static 
Shrodinger equation, given the Hamiltonian and the definite form of the 
wavefunction (by specifying the coefficients with the given basis set), the only
unknown in the Shrodinger equaiton is just the energy 'eigen value'. (the 
quotation mark here means the obtained energy value in each step of the guessing
- for the wavefucntion coefficients - and calculation does not correspond to the 
real eigen value before reaching the energy minimum)

The link for the material (CASTEP tutorial for the band structure calculation)
which the current summary is based on:
********************************************************************************

Local link:
/home/ai-peng/Dropbox/Documents/Research_General/Methodology/Simulations/DFT/
Band_Structure/CASTEP_Band Structure Claculations_Short Theory Description.pdf

Online link:
http://cmt.dur.ac.uk/sjc/Castep_Lectures2/lecture12.PDF

********************************************************************************

Yuanpeng Zhang @ 22-Jul-2016
School of Physics and Astronomy
Queen Mary, University of London
